feature: rust in yocto blog post - take1 (#388)
memfault/interrupt: _posts/2023-10-17-rust-in-yocto.md

---
title: "Rust on Yocto: A Seamless Integration"

> description: "A look at the various ways to integrate Rust into Yocto"

Reviewer: maybe
```suggestion
description: "A look at the various ways to use Rust into Yocto"
```

author: tsarlandie
tags: [rust, yocto, linux, embedded, cross-compilation]
---

<!-- excerpt start -->

> At Memfault, our love affair with Rust began in late 2022. What drew us to Rust? Well, the typical allure of a modern programming language: an impressive type-system, memory safety without the constant jitters, efficient concurrency management, a thriving package ecosystem, and overwhelming support from our engineering team. To put it simply, we're smitten. Our journey with Rust has been nothing short of transformative, enabling rapid progress and leading us to conquer challenges we previously deemed ... non-trivial.

Reviewer 2: This excerpt is on the long side. I would suggest limiting it to just this first paragraph.

```
$ cargo install --locked cargo-bitbake
$ cargo bitbake
```

The generated recipe includes all the essential elements required for a Yocto build, with a comprehensive listing of the dependencies and their respective versions. The essential `inherit cargo` line automates the process of building a Rust project with a `Cargo.toml` file, even accommodating the building of C dependencies if a `build.rs` exists.

Embedding this recipe within an existing layer and initiating `bitbake hellorust` builds the rust cross compiler and our program is built for the target.

## meta-rust-bin

[`meta-rust-bin`](https://github.com/rust-embedded/meta-rust-bin/tree/master), a project of the rust-embedded group, emerges as a sought-after alternative for packaging Rust programs within Yocto. As an OpenEmbedded/Yocto layer, it uses official pre-built rust toolchains.

Among its other merits are its frequent updates aligning with the latest Rust versions and its support for older Yocto versions, ranging [from dunfell to langdale](https://github.com/rust-embedded/meta-rust-bin/blob/ef9a765b0785ed9e964691ac1a5a302dd0a0ea62/conf/layer.conf#L13-L20).

> Previously, `meta-rust-bin` presented a `cargo` class, rendering it incompatible with `meta-rust`. The recommendation was to use a `BBMASK` statement to "hide" the built-in `cargo` and `rust` classes. Fortunately, this stumbling block was recently addressed with [the classname undergoing a change to `cargo_bin`](https://github.com/rust-embedded/meta-rust-bin/pull/136), enabling seamless usage of both the official Rust support and meta-rust-bin within the same Yocto project.

Reviewer: Nice, I hadn't seen that this got merged.

Reviewer 3: Let's crosslink to previous webinars to boost SEO rankings. Recommend placing this before the subscription and table of contents callouts. Thomas, up to you if it should be phrased in the third person (as it's currently structured), or if you'd like to change it to "Check out MY previous webinars..."

> 📺 **Watch the Webinar Recordings**
>
> Check out Thomas' previous webinars for more Embedded Linux discussions: [Over-the-Air Updates for Embedded Linux Devices](https://go.memfault.com/over-the-air-updates-embedded-linux-devices) and [Wrangling Penguins: Better Embedded Linux Monitoring and Debugging](https://go.memfault.com/better-embedded-linux-monitoring-debugging-memfault).

Author: added - I think the 3rd person makes it a little less "sales-y" so I kept it.

    - Reconstructing the rust compiler from its source can be a time-consuming affair.
    - Maintaining the recipe becomes inevitable, more so with the necessity to enumerate the complete list of dependencies.

3. **The `meta-rust-bin/meta-rust` Recipe**: This alternative champions the use of pre-constructed binaries of rust, cargo, and libstd. And the recipes are succinct, eliminating the need to itemize all dependencies. Nevertheless, it has its nuances:
    - It introduces an additional layer to your project.
    - Its recipe blueprint diverges from the `meta-rust` recipes.

At Memfault, our inclination leans towards the `meta-rust-bin`. Its compatibility with a broader range of Yocto versions combined with its efficiency in reducing build time strikes a chord with us. That said, drafting a recipe for `meta-rust` isn't a complex undertaking, especially with the assistance of `cargo bitbake`. We keep one at our disposal, catering to clients who favor `meta-rust`.

## Another Important Consideration: Binaries Size

When delving into Rust for embedded systems, certain facets remain untouched in our discussion but merit attention in future deliberations.

> - **The Rust Standard Library**: A conspicuous drawback in the methods discussed is the static linking of the Rust standard library into each binary file. This addition can augment the file by several hundred kilobytes. An ingenious workaround might be the construction of `libstd-rs` as a dynamic library, allowing all the rust binaries within the system to share it. As Rust binaries become an integral part of your system image, this factor will gain prominence. None of the solutions presented today support this but they all mention it as a future improvement. Presently, our tactic involves dynamically linking (filesystem links) our three binaries (`memfaultd`, `memfaultctl`, and `memfault-core-handler`) to a singular binary. This unique binary alters its function based on the name used in the invocation, a strategy we fondly refer to as the `busybox` approach.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **The Rust Standard Library**: A conspicuous drawback in the methods discussed is the static linking of the Rust standard library into each binary file. This addition can augment the file by several hundred kilobytes. An ingenious workaround might be the construction of `libstd-rs` as a dynamic library, allowing all the rust binaries within the system to share it. As Rust binaries become an integral part of your system image, this factor will gain prominence. None of the solutions presented today support this but they all mention it as a future improvement. Presently, our tactic involves symlinking (filesystem links) our three programs (`memfaultd`, `memfaultctl`, and `memfault-core-handler`) to a singular binary. This unique binary alters its function based on the name used in the invocation, a strategy we fondly refer to as the `busybox` approach.
```

I wouldn't use "dynamically linking" there.

Reviewer 3: Same idea, as the webinar callout above but for recommended readings of previous posts. 

>📚**Recommended Reading**
>
>Fan of Rust? Check out our other Rust articles: [Asynchronous Rust on Cortex-M Microcontrollers](https://interrupt.memfault.com/blog/embedded-async-rust), [Rust for Low Power Digital Signal Processing](https://interrupt.memfault.com/blog/rust-for-digital-signal-processing), [From Zero to main(): Bare metal Rust](https://interrupt.memfault.com/blog/zero-to-main-rust-1).
